arXiv:cs/9810014v1  [cs.CL]  13 Oct 1998
Resources for Evaluation of Summarization Techniques
Judith L. Klavans* and Kathleen R. McKeown** and Min-Yen Kan** and Susan Lee***
Center for Research on Information Access*
Department of Computer Science**
Computer Sciences Division***
Columbia University
Columbia University
University of California, Berkeley
New York, NY 10027
New York, NY 10027
Berkeley, CA 94720
Abstract
We report on two corpora to be used in the evaluation of component systems for the tasks of (1) linear segmentation of text and
(2) summary-directed sentence extraction. We present characteristics of the corpora, methods used in the collection of user judgments,
and an overview of the application of the corpora to evaluating the component system. Finally, we discuss the problems and issues with
construction of the test set which apply broadly to the construction of evaluation resources for language technologies.
1. Application Context
We report on two corpora to be used in the evaluation of
component systems for the tasks of (1) linear segmentation
of text and (2) summary-directed sentence extraction.
Any development of a natural language processing (NLP)
application requires systematic testing and evaluation. In
the course of our ongoing development of a robust, domain-
independentsummarization system at Columbia University,
we have followed this procedure of incremental testing and
evaluation1.
However, we found that the resources that
were necessary for the evaluation of our particular system
components did not exist in the NLP community. Thus, we
built a set of evaluation resources which we present in this
paper. Our goal in this paper is to describe the resources
and to discuss both theoretical and practical issues that arise
in the development of such resources. All evaluation re-
sources are publicly available, and we welcome collabora-
tion on use and improvements.
The two resources discussed in this paper were utilized
in the initial evaluation of a text analysis module. In the
larger context, the analysis module serves as the initial steps
for a complete system for summarization by analysis and
reformulation, rather than solely by sentence extraction. Anal-
ysis components provide strategic conceptual information
in the form of segments which are high in information con-
tent, and in which similar or different; this information pro-
vides input to subsequent processing, including reasoning
about a single document or set of documents, followed by
summary generation using language generation techniques
(McKeown and Radev 1995, Radev and McKeown 1997).
1This research was supported by the NSF Award 9618797 in
the Speech, Text, Image, and Multimedia in Language Technol-
ogy (STIMULATE) program entitled “STIMULATE: Generating
Coherent Summaries of On-Line Documents: Combining Statisti-
cal and Symbolic Techniques” under the direction of Kathleen R.
McKeown, Department of Computer Science and Judith L. Kla-
vans, Center for Research on Information Access”; Susan Lee was
supported at Columbia University by a summer internship under
the Computing Research Association (CRA) Distributed Mentor
Project.
2. Description of Resources
We detail these two evaluation corpora, both comprised
of a corpus of human judgments, fashioned to accurately
test the two technologies currently implemented in the text
analysis module: namely, linear segmentation of text and
sentence extraction.
2.1. Evaluation Resource for Segmentation
The segmentation task is motivated by the observation
that longer texts beneﬁt from automatic chunking of cohe-
sive sections. Even though newspaper text appears to be
segmented by paragraph and by headers, this segmentation
is often driven by arbitrary page layout and length consid-
erations rather than by discourse logic. For other kinds of
text, such as transcripts, prior segmentation may not exist.
Thus, our goal is to segment these texts by logical rhetorical
considerations.
In this section, we discuss the development of the eval-
uation corpus for the task of segmentation. This task in-
volves breaking input text into segments that represent some
meaningful grouping of contiguous portions of the text.
In our formulation of the segmentation task, we exam-
ined the speciﬁcs of a linear multi-paragraph segmentation
of the input text, “linear” in that we seek a sequential rela-
tion between the chunks, as opposed to “hierarchical” seg-
mentation (Marcu 1997). “Multiple paragraph” refers to
the size of the units to be grouped, as opposed to sentences
or words. We believe that this simple type of segmenta-
tion yields useful information for summarization. Within
the context of the text analysis module, segmentation is the
ﬁrst step in the identiﬁcation of key areas of documents.
Segmentation is followed by an identiﬁcation compo-
nent to label segments according to function and impor-
tance within the document. This labeling then permits rea-
soning and ﬁltering over labeled and ranked segments. In
the current implementation, segments are labeled according
to centrality vis `a vis the overall document.
2.1.1. Segmentation Corpus
To evaluate our segmentation algorithm’s effectiveness,
we needed to test our algorithm on a varied set of articles.
We ﬁrst utilized the publicly available Wall Street Journal
(WSJ) corpus provided by the Linguistic Data Consortium.
Many of these articles are very short, i.e.
8 to 10 sen-

tences, but segmentation is more meaningful in the context
of longer articles; thus, we screened for articles as close
as possible to 50 sentences. Additionally, we controlled
our selection of articles for the absence of section headers
within the article itself, to guarantee that articles were not
written to ﬁt section headers. This is not to say that an eval-
uation cannot be done with articles with headers, but rather
that an initial evaluation was performed without this com-
plicating factor.
We arrived at a set of 15 newspaper articles from the
WSJ corpus. We supplemented these by 5 articles from
the on-line version of The Economist magazine, following
the same restrictions, to protect against biasing our results
to reﬂect WSJ style. Although WSJ articles were approxi-
mately 50 sentences in length; the Economist articles were
slightly longer, ranging from 50 to 75 sentences. Average
paragraph length of the WSJ articles was 2 to 3 sentences,
which is typical of newspaper paragraphing, and 3 to 4 for
the Economist. Documents were domain independent but
genre speciﬁc in general terms, i.e.
current events (any
topic) but journalistic writing, since this is the initial focus
of our summarization project.
2.1.2. Task
The goal of the task was to collect a set of user judg-
ments on what is a meaningful segment with the hypothesis
that what users perceive to be a meaningful unit will be use-
ful data in evaluating the effectiveness of our system. The
goal of our system is to identify segment boundaries and
rank according to meaningfulness. The data could be used
both to evaluate our algorithm, or in later stages, as part of
training data for supervised learning.
To construct the evaluation corpus, subjects were asked
to divide an average of six selected articles into meaning-
ful topical units at paragraph boundaries. The deﬁnition of
segment was purposefully left vague in order to assess the
user’s interpretation of the notion “meaningful unit.” Sub-
jects were also encouraged to give subjective strengths of
the segments, if they wanted to. Subjects were not told how
the segments would be used for later processing, nor in-
formed of the number of segment breaks to produce, and
were given no further criteria for choice. Finally, subjects
were not constrained by time restrictions; however, subjects
were given the tester’s time estimate on task completion
time of 10 minutes per article (for both reading the article
and determining segment boundaries). In total, 13 volun-
teers produced results, all graduate students or people with
advanced degrees. A total of 19 articles were segmented by
a minimum of four, and often ﬁve, subjects. All 13 subjects
segmented the one remaining single article.
2.1.3. Analysis of Results of Human Segmentation
The variation in segmentation style produced results rang-
ing from very few segments (1-2 per document) to over 15
for the longer documents. As shown in Table 1, the num-
ber of segments varied according to the length of the article
and speciﬁc article in question. Most subjects completed
the task within the time we had initially estimated.
Subjects were found to be consistent in behavior: if they
segmented one article with fewer segments than the aver-
age, then the other articles segmented by the subject were
often also segmented with fewer breaks. For example, Sub-
ject 4 displays “lumping” behavior, whereas Subject 6 is a
“splitter”. This points to an individual’s notion of granu-
larity, which is further discussed below in section 2.1.5.
Article br7854
Article am3332
Article 0085
Article 0090
P = 20
P = 10
P = 19
P = 24
Subject 1
6
4
7
7
Subject 2
7
5
8
7
Subject 3
10
4
11
9
Article fn6703
Article mo0414
Article 0071
P = 10
P = 10
P = 19
Subject 4
2
2
5
Subject 5
5
4
5
Subject 6
9
7
16
Table 1: Lumpers and Splitters problem on Segmentation
Evaluation Corpora (where P = number of paragraph breaks
in article)
2.1.4. Use
To compile the gold standard we used majority opin-
ion, as advocated by Gale et al, 1992, i.e. if the majority
indicated a break at the same spot, then that location was
deemed a segment boundary. We compiled the judgments
into a database for use in optimal parameterization of a set
of constraints for weighting groups of lexical and phrasal
term occurrences. We calculated a high level of interjudge
reliability using Cochran’s Q, signiﬁcant to the 1% level for
all but 2 articles which were signiﬁcant to the 5% level. See
Kan et al, 1998 for further discussion of the use of data in
evaluating the segmentation algorithm.
2.1.5. Issues
The segmentation task is subject to interpretation, just
like many natural language tasks which involve drawing
subjective boundaries. Since the directions were open-ended,
responses can be divided into “the lumpers” and “the split-
ters”, to use the terminology applied to lexicographerswhen
building dictionary deﬁnitions. In the case of dictionary
construction, lumpers tend to write more terse, condensed
deﬁnitions which consist of several possible uses in one
deﬁnition, whereas splitters will divide deﬁnitions into a
larger number of deﬁnitions, each of which may cover only
one aspect or one usage of the word. For segmentation,
the way this tendency expressed itself is that the lumpers
tended to mark very few boundaries, whereas the splitters
marked numerous boundaries. In fact, as mentioned above,
some splitters marked over 15 segments for longer articles,
which is over 85% of all possible paragraph breaks, on av-
erage.
For this reason, in determining what type of data to ex-
tract from the evaluation corpus, we took only the majority
segments for training and testing; the result is that lumpers
end up determining the majority.
2.1.6. Future Work on the Segmentation Resource

For future work, we would like to extend the resource
to include a range of genres (such as journal articles, doc-
umentation) as well as expand the range of sources to in-
clude additional news articles (i.e. LDC’s North American
News Text Corpus). Also, we plan to extend our collection
to other languages since there is little research on applica-
bility of general techniques, such as segmentation based on
terms and local maxima, across languages for multilingual
analysis tasks. We are also considering analyzing articles
with section headers, to see whether they follow the seg-
ment boundaries and if so, how they can be utilized for ex-
panding an evaluation resource.
In addition to expanding the corpus by genre, we also
plan to collect information for the segment labeling task.
In this stage, segments are labeled for their function within
the document. In addition, this resource will be useful in
providing information on the function of the ﬁrst (or lead)
segments. In journalistic prose, the lead segment can often
be used as a summary due to stylized rules prescribing that
the most important information must be ﬁrst. However, the
lead can also be an anecdotal lead, i.e. material that grabs
the reader’s attention and leads into the article. Thus, we
plan to perform a formal analysis of how human subjects
characterize anecdotal leads.
2.1.7. Availability
The segmentation evaluation data is publicly available
by request to the third author. Inquiries for the textual data
that the evaluation corpus is based on should be directed to
the respective owners of the materials.
2.2. Evaluation Resource for Sentence Extraction
In this section, we describe the collection of judgments
to create the evaluation resource used to test summary-directed
sentence extraction. One method to produce a “summary”
of a text is by performing sentence extraction. In this ap-
proach a small set of informative sentences are chosen to
represent the full text and presented to the user as a sum-
mary. Although computationally appealing, this approach
falls prey to at least two major disadvantages: (1) missing
key information and (2) disﬂuencies in the extracted text.
Our approach takes steps to handle both of these prob-
lems and thus changes what we mean by the sentence ex-
traction task. The majority of systems use sentence extrac-
tion as a complete approach to summarization in that the
sentences extracted from the text are, in fact, the summary
presented to the user. In the context of our system, we
use the sentence extraction component to choose a larger
set of sentences than required for the intended summary
length. All these sentences are then further analyzed for
the generation component that will synthesize only the key
information needed in a summary. The synthesis procedure
will eliminate some clauses and possibly some whole sen-
tences as well, resulting in a reformulated summary of the
intended length. Thus, the goals of our “sentence extrac-
tion for generation” task differ from “sentence extraction
as summarization” in that we seek high recall of key infor-
mation.
2.2.1. Extraction Corpus
We used newswire text, available on the World-Wide
Web from Reuters. In examining random articles available
at the time of testing, we found that the number of sentences
per article were short: 18, on average. Short paragraphs
were also a characteristic of the corpus, similar to the cor-
pus used for the segmentation evaluation: 1 to 3 sentences
per paragraph on average. These shorter texts enabled us to
analyze more articles than in the segmentation evaluation.
As a result we were able to double the number of articles
used for testing; we selected 40 articles, with titles, taken
from this on-line version.
2.2.2. Task
Na¨ıve readers were asked to select sentences with high
information content. Instructions were kept general, to let
subjects form their own interpretation of “informativeness”,
similar to the segmentation experiment. A minimum of one
sentence was required, but no maximum number was set.
All 15 subjects were volunteers, consisting of graduate stu-
dents and professors from different ﬁelds. Subjects were
grouped at random into 5 reading groups of 3 subjects each
such that an evaluation based on majority opinion would
possible. Each reading group analyzed 8 articles, which
covered the entire 40 article set. Articles were provided in
full with titles.
2.2.3. Analysis of Results of Human Sentence Extraction
As expected with newswire and other journalistic text,
many individuals chose the ﬁrst sentence. Although some
subjects just took only the ﬁrst sentence for each article as
a summary, the majority picked several sentences, usually
including the ﬁrst sentence. Subjects implicitly followed
the guidelines to pick whole sentences; no readers selected
phrases or sentence fragments. Subjects indicated that this
was not a difﬁcult task, unlike the segmentation task.
2.2.4. Use
To establish the evaluation gold standard, we again ap-
plied the majority method, which resulted in choosing all
sentences that were selected by at least 2 of 3 judges as “in-
formative”. The data was used for the automatic evaluation
of an algorithm developed at Columbia, which exploits both
symbolic and statistical techniques. The sentence extrac-
tion algorithm we have developed uses ranked weighting
for information from a number of well established statis-
tical heuristics from the information retrieval community,
such as TF*IDF, combined with output from term identiﬁ-
cation, segmentation, and segment function modules dis-
cussed in the ﬁrst part of the paper.
Additional weight
is given to sentences containing title words. Furthermore,
several experimental symbolic techniques were incorporated
as factors in the sentence selection weighting process: such
as looking for verbs of communication (Klavans and Kan,
1998, to appear).
An informal examination of the data revealed high level
of consistency among very important sentences, but a lower
level of consistency when important detail was given. We

suspect that the reason may be due to the equivalency and
redundancy of certain sentences.
2.2.5. Issues
Article 02
Article 18
Article 22
S = 20
S = 20
S = 26
Subject 1
1
2
1
Subject 2
1
2
1
Subject 3
1
2
1
Article 03
Article 10
Article 11
S = 26
S = 15
S = 17
Subject 4
4
4
4
Subject 5
3
2
2
Subject 6
1
1
1
Table 2: Verbose and Terse extracters phenomenon in Sen-
tence Extraction Evaluation Corpora (where S = number of
sentences in article)
As mentioned in the ﬁrst section, the project which this
resource was collected for consists of extraction of key sen-
tences from text, and reformulation of a subset of these sen-
tences into a coherent and concise summary. As such, our
task is to extract more sentences than would be explicitly
needed for a summary.
The primary challenge in building this resource is anal-
ogous to the lumpers versus splitters difference discussed
in Section 2.1.5. For extraction, the issue is embodied in
the verbose versus terse extractors, i.e. the number of sen-
tences selected by subjects had a wide range. Some subjects
consistently picked very few or just one sentence per arti-
cle, whereas others consistently picked many more. This
is shown in Table 2, where for example, subject 1 picked
one or two sentences from each article over 20 sentences
or more; whereas both subjects 2 and 3 picked an average
of ﬁve sentences from the same article. Similarly, subject 6
consistently picked only one sentence, but subject 4 picked
four sentences. This phenomenon, coupled with the use of
a majority method evaluation biases results for high pre-
cision rather than high recall. Thus, there is a mismatch
between what we asked people to do and what the program
was to produce. We believe that our compiled resource may
be even better suited for an evaluation of a summarization
approach based purely on sentence extraction, although it
is still useful for our evaluation.
2.2.6. Future Work on the Extraction Resource
We could compensate for the mismatch in task and al-
gorithm above in two ways. One is in the way instructions
are given; we could ask subjects to pick all of the sentences
that could be considered of high information content, or we
could give a number of sentences we would like them to
pick for each article. For the very verbose, we could place
an upper bound on the number of selected sentences. This
could be done simply as some function of article length,
logarithmic or linear. In the current collection, we found
that some readers thought nearly every sentence was impor-
tant, and this affected precision in the ﬁnal evaluation task.
Some constraints would push our results towards the more
verbose, and eliminate both the terse subject and the exces-
sively verbose. Another approach is to relax the constraints
for calculating the gold standard. As mentioned above, the
majority method in conjunction with the lumpers versus
splitters phenomenon biases results for high precision. In
future work, we will investigate other methods for culling
an evaluation corpus for “correct” answers, such as frac-
tional recall and precision (Hatzivassiloglou and McKeown
93).
2.2.7. Availability
The sentence extraction corpora is also publicly avail-
able; send any requests to the ﬁrst author. Again, inquiries
for the textual data that the evaluation corpus is based on
should be directed to the respective owners of the materi-
als.
3. Conclusion
We have created two corpus resources to be used as a
gold standard in the evaluation of two modules in the anal-
ysis stage of a summarization system. We have discussed
several fundamental issues that must be considered in the
effective construction of evaluation resources. With an in-
creasing number of publicly available evaluation resources
such as these, we contribute to the goals of the collective
sharing of resources and techniques to enable the NLP com-
munity to improve the quality of our future work.
4. References
Gale, William, Kenneth W. Church and David Yarowsky.
(1992). Estimating upper and lower bounds on the per-
formance of word-sense disambiguation programs. Pro-
ceedings of the ACL. Newark, Delaware. pp. 249-256.
Hatzivassiloglou, Vasileios and Kathleen R. McKeown. (1993).
Towards the Automatic Identiﬁcation of Adjectival Scales:
Clustering Adjectives According to Meaning. Proceed-
ings of the 31st Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics. Columbus, Ohio, USA. pp.
172-182.
Kan, Min-Yen, Judith L. Klavans, Kathleen R. McKeown
(1998) Linear Segmentation and Segment Relevance. Columbia
University Computer Science Department Technical Re-
port.
Klavans, Judith L. and Min-Yen Kan. (1998, to appear).
The Role of Verbs in Document Analysis. Proceedings
of the 1998 COLING / ACL Conference. Montr´eal, Qu´ebec,
Canada.
Marcu, Daniel. (1997) The Rhetorical Parsing of Unre-
stricted Natural Language Texts. Proceedings of the 35th
Annual Meeting of the Association Computational Lin-
guistics and 8th Conference of the European Chapter of
the Association for Computational Linguistics. Madrid,
Spain. pp. 96-103.
McKeown, Kathleen R. and Dragomir R. Radev. Generat-
ing Summaries of Multiple News Articles. Proceedings,
ACM Conference on Research and Development in In-
formation Retrieval SIGIR’95 (Seattle, WA, July 1995).

Radev, Dragomir R. and Kathleen R. McKeown. (1997).
Building a Generation Knowledge Source using Internet-
Accessible Newswire. Proceedings of the 5th Confer-
ence on Applied Natural Language Processing. Wash-
ington, D.C.
