arXiv:cs/9904018v1  [cs.CL]  24 Apr 1999
A COMPUTATIONAL MEMORY AND PROCESSING MODEL
FOR PROSODY
Janet E. Cahn
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
cahn@media.mit.edu
ABSTRACT
This paper links prosody to the information in the
text and how it is processed by the speaker. It describes
the operation and output of Loq, a text-to-speech imple-
mentation that includes a model of limited attention and
working memory. Attentional limitations are key. Vary-
ing the attentional parameter in the simulations varies in
turn what counts as given and new in a text, and there-
fore, the intonational contours with which it is uttered.
Currently, the system produces prosody in three diﬀer-
ent styles: child-like, adult expressive, and knowledgeable.
This prosody also exhibits diﬀerences within each style
– no two simulations are alike. The limited resource ap-
proach captures some of the stylistic and individual variety
found in natural prosody.
1.
INTRODUCTION
Ask any lay person to imitate computer speech and you
will be treated to an utterance delivered in melodic and
rhythmic monotone, possibly accompanied by choppy ar-
ticulation and a voice quality that is nasal and strained.
In fact, current synthesized speech is far superior. Yet few
would argue that synthetic and natural speech are indistin-
guishable. The diﬀerence, as popular impression suggests,
is the relative lack of interesting and natural variability in
the synthetic version. It may be traced in part to the lack
of a common causal account of pitch, timing, articulation
and voice quality. Intonation and stress are usually linked
to the linguistic and information structure of text. Fea-
tures such as pause location and word duration are linked
mainly to the speaker’s cognitive and expressive capacities,
and pitch range, intensity, voice quality and articulation
to her physiological and aﬀective state.
In this paper, I describe a production model that at-
tributes pitch and timing to the essential operations of a
speaker’s working memory – the storage and retrieval of in-
formation. Simulations with this model produce synthetic
speech in three of the prosodic styles likely to be associ-
ated with attentional and memory diﬀerences: a child-like
exaggerated prosody for limited recall; a more adult but
still expressive style for mid-range capacities; and a knowl-
edgeable style for maximum recall. The same model also
produces individual diﬀerences within each style, owing to
its stochastic storage algorithm. The ability to produce
both individual and genre variations supports its eventual
use in prosthetic, entertainment and information applica-
tions, especially in the production of reading materials for
the blind and the use of computer-based autonomous and
communicative agents.
2.
A MEMORY MODEL FOR
PROSODY
Prosody organizes spoken text into phrases, and high-
lights its most salient components with pitch accents, dis-
tinctive pitch contours applied to the word. Pitch accents
are both attentional and propositional.
Their very use
indicates salience; their particular form conveys a propo-
sition about the words they mark. For example, speakers
typically use a high pitch accent (denoted as H*) to mark
salient information that they believe to be new to the ad-
dressee.
Conversely, when they believe the addressee is
already aware of the information, they will typically de-
accent it[2] or, if it is salient, apply a low pitch accent
(L*)[7].
Re-stated as a commentary on working mem-
ory, the H* accent conveys the speaker’s belief that the
addressee can not retrieve the accented information from
working memory. De-accenting implicitly conveys the op-
posite expectation. The L* accent does so explicitly. This
view predicts diﬀerent speaking styles as a consequence
of the speaker’s beliefs about an addressee’s storage and
retrieval capacities. For example, it ascribes the exagger-
ated intonation that adults use with infants and young
children[4], to the adults’ belief that the child’s knowledge
and attention are extremely limited; therefore, he needs
clear and explicit prosodic instructions as to how to pro-
cess language and interaction.
The model of working memory I use shows how retrieval
limits can determine the information status of an item
as either given or new, and therefore, its corresponding
prosody. It was developed and implemented by Thomas
Landauer[5] and models working memory as a periodic
three dimensional Cartesian space, the focus of attention
via a moving search and storage pointer that traverses the
space in a slow random walk, and retrieval ability via a
search radius that deﬁnes the size of a region whose center
is the pointer’s current location. Search for familiar items
proceeds outward from the pointer, one city block per time
step, up to the distance speciﬁed by the search radius.
As a consequence of the random walk, incoming stim-
uli are stored in a spatial pattern that is locally random

search
region,
radius = 1
search &
storage
pointer
the
pointer's
random
walk
Figure 1: Using AWM, stimuli are classed as given if they
have counterparts within the the search radius. New items
have no such counterparts because they are either not in
working memory, or are stored outside the radius.
but globally coherent. That is, temporal proximity in the
stimuli begets spatial proximity in the model. It contrasts
with stack models of memory that are strictly chronolog-
ical, and semantic spaces in which distance is conceptual
rather than temporal.
Most importantly, it is a valid
computational model of attention and working memory
(AWM, from here on). Landauer used it to reproduce the
well-known learning phenomena of recency and frequency,
in which subjects tend to recall stimuli encountered most
recently or most frequently[5]. It has since been used by
Walker[9] to show that resource-bound dialog partners will
make a proposition explicit when it is not retrievable or in-
ferable, despite having been previously mentioned.
Retrieval in AWM is the process of matching the current
stimulus to the contents of the region centered around the
pointer. The search radius determines the size of this re-
gion and therefore is the main AWM simulation parameter.
If a match is found within the search region, the stimulus
is classiﬁed as given, otherwise, it is new. Figure 1 illus-
trates this with the simple example of ﬁlled and unﬁlled
circles, a 4x4 AWM space, and a search radius of one. At
the center of the search region is the current stimulus, a
ﬁlled circle.
Because the region contains no other ﬁlled
circles, the stimulus is classed as new. Had the stimulus
been an unﬁlled circle, it would have instead been classed
as given because a match is retrievable within the search
radius. Or, alternatively, had the search radius been two
instead of one, a matching ﬁlled circle would have been
found, and the stimulus again classed as given.
The ability to identify given and new items makes AWM
a useful producer of prosody based on this distinction. Os-
tensibly, it shows how a speaker’s processing aﬀects her
prosody. However, although the working memory belongs
to the speaker, its operation and determinations may re-
ﬂect the speaker’s own retrieval capacities, her estimate
of those of the addressee, or a mixture of both. That is,
a speaker can always adapt her style (prosodic and lexi-
cal) to the needs of a less knowledgeable or capable ad-
dressee.
A cooperative and communicative speaker will
usually do this.
However, she cannot model a retrieval
capacity greater than her own – her own knowledge and
attentional limits always constitute the upper bounds on
her performance.
3.
SYSTEM DESIGN
The AWM component is embedded in a software im-
plementation, Loq, that takes a text-to-speech approach.
As shown Figure 2, the input to AWM is text, the out-
Text
Speech
Linguistic Analysis
AWM: Search & Storage
Map to Pitch and Timing
Synthesizer
Figure 2: AWM as a component of the Loq system.
put is speech.
Therefore, Loq models read rather than
spontaneous speech. Text comprehension is the process of
searching for a match. Uttering the text is a question of
mapping the search process and its results to prosodic fea-
tures and sending the prosodically annotated text to the
synthesizer.
Like many commercial text-to-speech synthesizers, the
text structure is analyzed before prosody is assigned. How-
ever, the Loq analysis is richer.
It takes advantage of
on-line linguistic databases to approximate the speaker’s
knowledge of English semantics, pronunciation and usage.
The structural analysis is richer as well, providing both
grammatical structure (subject, verb, object), empty cate-
gories (ellipses, for example) and information about clausal
attachment. The main qualitative diﬀerence is that Loq
interposes a model of limited attention and working mem-
ory between the text analysis and prosodic mapping com-
ponents.
3.1.
Matching
For the example in Figure 1, the matching criterion is
binary and simple – a circle is either ﬁlled or unﬁlled. How-
ever, language is many more times complex, and matches
may occur for a variety of features, some of which are
more informative than others. The matching criteria used
in Loq attempt to distill from the literature (e.g., [6, 3])
the most relevant and prevalent ways that items in mem-
ory prime for the current stimulus, and by the same token,
the ways in which the current stimulus can function as a
retrieval cue. In other words, they gauge the mutual infor-
mation between the current stimulus and previously stored
items.
Altogether, Loq tests for matches on twenty-four se-
mantic, syntactic, collocation, grammatical and acoustical
features. Each test contributes to the total match score,
which is then compared to a threshold.
If it is below,
the search continues; if above, it stops. As shown in Fig-
ure 3, matches on any criterion express priming, and scores
above the threshold constitute a match suﬃcient to stop
the search even before it reaches the edge of the search
region. Because some tests are more informative than oth-
ers, a high score can reﬂect the positive outcome of many

 > 0
priming
stimulus
previously
stored item Compare
score
> threshold
no
priming
match
beyond search
limit?
yes
no
yes
no
yes
no
Figure 3: Loq matching algorithm.
un-informative tests, or of one that is deﬁnitive. Thus, in
the current ordering, co-reference ensures a match, while
structural parallelism in and of itself does not.
3.2.
Input
The matching criteria determine the form and kind of
information in the text input. As with commercial synthe-
sizers, this includes part of speech tagging. Loq uses the
output of Lingsoft’s ENGCG (English Constraint Gram-
mar) software which provides both tags and phrase struc-
ture information. However, reliable automatic means for
identifying other information, such as grammatical clauses,
empty categories, attachment and co-reference do not yet
exist. Therefore, this information was entered by hand.
The Loq software turns the parsed and annotated text
into a sequence of tokens that assembles clauses in a bot-
tom up fashion, starting with the word and followed by
the syntactic and grammatical clauses to which it belongs.
This models the reader’s assembly of the words into mean-
ingful syntactic and grammatical groupings.1
To facilitate the matching process, the text is also aug-
mented with information from the WordNet database for
semantic comparisons, a pronunciation database for acous-
tical comparisons and the Thorndike-Lorge and Kucera-
Francis for word frequency counts2 to scale the match score
by the prior probability for the language. The WordNet
synonym indices were assigned by hand. However, all sub-
sequent semantic comparisons using WordNet are auto-
matic as required by the matching process.
3.3.
Mapping
I have described how AWM produces the L* accent (or
none) for retrievable items, and H* for new ones. However,
there are more than two pitch accents – Pierrehumbert et
al.[1] identify six3 – and more components to prosody. Ob-
taining them from one model ﬁrst requires an adjustment
such that given or new status is determined from the ef-
fect of the stimulus on the region as a whole, as follows:
The result of any one comparison aﬀects the “state” of the
item to which the stimulus is compared. State is simply
deﬁned – a L annotation records a match most any crite-
rion,4 and a H annotation records a match score of zero.
1Adapting this for a spontaneous speaker would proceed
in reverse, from the concept, to grammatical roles, syntactic
phrases and ﬁnally, the words.
2As provided in the Oxford Psycholinguistic Database.
3L*, H*, L+H*, L*+H, H+L*, H*+L.
4Some criteria are parasitic and only contribute to the score
in combination with other criteria.
L
H
L L
H
After
comparisons
H
L
L
H
H
L+H*
Before
 comparisons
L*+H
L
H
L
H
H
L
H
L L
H
Figure 4: In Loq, bitonals occur when the L/H counts
diﬀer before and after the matching process.
The main
tone of a bitonal is treated as a categorical indicator of
the magnitude of the eﬀect of the stimulus on the context.
Thus, the comparison process registers both priming and a
true match. Both receive L annotations, but only a match
whose score exceeds the threshold stops the search.
A pitch accent is then derived by comparing the con-
tents of the search radius before and after the matching
process.
Majority rules apply such that the annotation
with the higher count becomes the deﬁning tone. If both
the before and after conﬁgurations are composed mainly
of L annotations, the accent form is L+L, which becomes
the L* accent. However, if there is a change, for example,
from a L to H majority, the accent form is L+H. The in-
terpretation of L+L is, roughly, that a familiar item was
expected and provided.
Likewise, the interpretation for
L+H is that a familiar item was expected but an unex-
pected one provided.
To complete the bitonal derivation, Loq treats the lo-
cation of the main tone as a categorical reﬂection of the
magnitude of the eﬀect of the stimulus. If the stimulus
changes the annotations for the majority of items in the
search region, the second tone is the main tone. Other-
wise, it is the ﬁrst. This schema produces the six pitch
accents identiﬁed by Pierrehumbert et al. More generally,
the annotation schema provides the model with a simple
form of feedback – the results of prior processing persist
and contribute to a bias that aﬀects future processing.
The pitch accent mapping illustrates the main features
of the prosodic mapping in general. First, all mappings
reﬂect the activity and state within the region deﬁned by
the search radius. Second, they express some aspects of
prosody as a plausible consequence of search and storage.
For example, storage and search times are mapped to word
and pause duration. However, others – for example, the
bitonal derivation– are, at best, coherent with the opera-
tion and purpose of the model and not contradicted by the
current (sparse) data on the relation of cognitive capacity
to the prosody of read speech. In all, the mapping from
AWM activity and state produces intonational categories
(pitch accent, phrase accent and boundary tone) and their
prominence, word duration, pause duration and the pitch
range of an intonational phrase.

5
10
15
20
0
20
40
60
H*
unaccented
search radius
words
Figure 5: Mean unaccented vs. H* accented word counts
as a function of search radius.
0
5
10
15
20
25
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
search radius
prominence
Figure 6: Mean pitch accent prominence for all six accent
types, as a function of search radius.
4.
RESULTS
Although simulations were run using text from three
diﬀerent genres (ﬁction, radio broadcast, rhymed poetry),
two and three dimensional AWM spaces and three memory
sizes (small, mid-range and large), most of the prosodic
output was correlated with the search radius.
There-
fore, the results reported here are for the mid-range two-
dimensional memory (22x22) and for the news report text
only (one paragraph, 68 words.) Five simulations were run
for each radius.
True to the attentional predictions, Figure 5 shows that
as the search radius increases, the mean number of unac-
cented words increases as well, while the number of H* ac-
cents decreases. Under the current mapping, pitch accent
prominence is a function the distance at which the search
stops and the number of comparisons performed prior to
stopping. This produces a decrease in the mean promi-
nence as the search radius increases (Figure 6).
These
patterns contribute to the lively and child-like intonation
produced for the smallest radii (1 and 2), the expressive
but more subdued intonation for the mid-range radii (3-8)
and ﬂatter intonation of the higher radii.
The naturalness of synthetic prosody is diﬃcult to evalu-
ate via in perceptual tests[8]. However, informal comments
from listeners revealed that while the three styles were rec-
ognizable and the prosody more natural-sounding than the
commercial default, it was best for shorter sections rather
than for the passages as a whole. A comparison with the
natural prosody for the same text (the BU Corpus radio
newscasts) showed that when the simulations agreed on
pitch accent location and type, they tended to disagree
on boundary location and type, mostly because the Loq
simulations produced many more phrase breaks than the
natural speaker.
5.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE
DIRECTIONS
Loq is a production model.
It produces prosody as
the consequence of cognitive processing as modeled by the
AWM component. Its focus on retrieval makes it a perfor-
mance model as well, demonstrating that prosody is not
determined solely by the text. It produces three recogniz-
able styles that appear to correlate with retrieval capac-
ities as deﬁned by the search radius: child-like (for radii
of 1 and2), adult expressive (for radii between 3 and 8)
and knowledgeable (for radii higher than 8).
This is a
step towards producing prosody that is both expressive
and natural and, in addition, speciﬁc to the speaker,
Currently, the main problem is that the prosody is not
entirely cohesive within one text. Therefore, one next step
is to explore variations on the mapping of AWM activity
and state to prosodic features. More distant work includes
extending the model to incorporate other inﬂuences, espe-
cially the inﬂuence of physiology.
This may be the key
to producing more than three styles, and to incorporat-
ing both the dynamics and constraints that will produce
consistently natural-sounding speech.
6.
REFERENCES
1. Mary E. Beckman and Janet B. Pierrehumbert. Into-
national structure in Japanese and English. In Colin
Ewen and John Anderson, editors, Phonology Yearbook
3, pages 255–309. Cambridge University Press, 1986.
2. Gillian Brown. Prosodic Structure and the Given/New
Distinction.
In A. Cutler and D. R. Ladd, editors,
Prosody: Models and Measurements, chapter 6, pages
67–77. Springer Verlag, 1983.
3. David Fay and Anne Cutler. Malapropisms and the
Structure of the Mental Lexicon. Linguistic Inquiry,
8(3):505–520, Summer 1977.
4. A. Fernald and T. Simon. Expanded Intonation Con-
tours in Mother’s Speech to Newborns. Developmental
Psychology, 20:104–113, 1984.
5. Thomas K. Landauer.
Memory Without Organiza-
tion: Properties of a Model with Random Storage and
Undirected Retrieval. Cognitive Psychology, 7:495–531,
1975.
6. S. G. Nooteboom and J. M. B. Terken. What Makes
Speakers Omit Pitch Accents? An Experiment. Pho-
netica, 39:317–336, 1982.
7. Janet B. Pierrehumbert and Julia Hirschberg.
The
Meaning of Intonation Contours in the Interpretation
of Discourse. In Philip R. Cohen, Jerry Morgan, and
Martha E. Pollack, editors, Intentions in Communica-
tion, pages 271–311. MIT Press, 1990.
8. K. Ross and M. Ostendorf.
Prediction of abstract
prosodic labels for speech synthesis. Computer Speech
and Language, 10:155–185, 1996.
9. Marilyn A. Walker. Testing collaborative strategies by
computational simulations: cognitive and task eﬀects.
Knowledge-Based Systems, 8(2-3):105–116, April-June
1995.
