Attention Is All You Need

Ashish Vaswani* ‘Noam Shazeer* ‘Niki Parmar” Jakob Uszkoreit”
Google Brain Google Brain Google Research Google Research
avaswanidgoogle.com noamOgoogle.com nikip0google.com usz0google.com
‘Llion Jones” Aidan N. Gomez’! ‘Lukasz Kaiser”
Google Research University of Toronto Google Brain

lion@google.com aidan@cs.toronto.edu --lukaszkaiser@google.com

Ilia Polosukhin* *
i11ia. polosukhin@gmail.com

Abstract

‘The dominant sequence transduction models are based on complex recurrent or
convolutional neural networks that include an encoder and a decoder. The best
performing models also connect the encoder and decoder through an attention
mechanism. We propose a new simple network architecture, the Transformer,
based solely on attention mechanisms, dispensing with recurrence and convolutions
entirely. Experiments on two machine translation tasks show these models to
be superior in quality while being more parallelizable and requiring significantly
less time to train. Our model achieves 28.4 BLEU on the WMT 3014 English-
to-German translation task, improving over the existing best results, including
‘ensembles, by over 2 BLEU. On the WMT 2014 English-to-French translation task,
‘our model establishes a new single-model state-of-the-art BLEU score of 41.0 afier
training for 3.5 days on eight GPUs, a small fraction of the training costs of the
best models from the literature.

1 Introduction

Recurrent neural networks, long short-term memory [12] and gated recurrent [7] neural networks
in particular, have been firmly established as state of the art approaches in sequence modeling and
transduction problems such as language modeling and machine translation [29, 2, 5]. Numerous
efforts have since continued to push the boundaries of recurrent language models and encoder-decoder
architectures [31, 21, 13]

“Eiqual contbution. Listing order is random. Jakob proposed replacing RNNS with sel-attetion and stated
the effort to evaluate this idea. Ashish, with Mla, designed and implemented the first Transformer models and
has een crucially involved every aspect ofthis work. Noam proposed scaled dt-produc tention, multi-head
attention and the parameter-free position representation and became the other person involved in nearly every
<ul. Nik designed, implemented, tuned and evaluated countless model variants in our orginal codebase and
tensor2tensor. lion also experimented with novel model varans, was responsible fr our inital codebase, and
efficient inference and visualizations. Lukasz and Aidan spent countless long days designing various parts of and
implementing esos replacing oer codebase, grey improving ess a massively acelin

+ Work performed while at Google Brain

4 Work performed while at Google Research.
